[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology welcome again to church history
and theology today's episode finds us at
the very beginning of the New Testament
Church as we begin this new season
walking through the 20 centuries of
Church's history we find ourselves
in the book of Acts so as we get started
here grab your Bibles we are going to be
in the book of Acts chapters 2 and
chapters 4 and be wory to open those
because as we look into the beginning of
the church's history we're going to find
that we have many descriptions of the
first generation of the church that help
us to guide and uh col in our
understanding of what to expect going
forward what things that we see that are
familiar what things we see that are
unfamiliar and what they tell us about
that first generation of the church
today's episode is called the New
Testament Church is born and that will
obviously find us on the day of
Pentecost in Acts chapter 2 and while
we're going to spend most of our time
looking into the latter half of chapter
2 and and part of chapter 4 I did want
to walk through quickly the day of
Pentecost because it is a significant
moment in the history of the church and
it tells us a great deal about the
transition that has taken place after
the Ascension of Jesus and the day that
the spirit of God came and rested in the
hearts of his people this provides for
us a great beginning definition for how
it is that the church functions it is
not merely a human endeavor but it is a
place very similar to the Tabernacle
where God has met humans where God and
humans overlap where Heaven and Earth
overlap and the intention the purpose
the sacrifices of God continue on until
the day of
eternity so on the day that the New
Testament Church is born it really is
helpful for us to look into exactly what
happened the order of events and then
the results of it what were the habits
of the New Testament Church when it was
born what were the characteristics that
we should be looking for what
distinguished it from Judaism what
distinguished it from the Roman
religions and what distinctives will we
look for going forward it is kind of a
remarkable thing that most of the time
in church history these types of things
are brushed over really quick but I do
not want to brush over them quickly I
want to settle into them and look into
them so without further Ado grab your
Bibles we are going to find ourselves in
Acts chapter 2 this
evening Acts chapter
2 uh the first section here that we're
going to look at is the first 41 verses
now I'm not necessarily going to read
them all in total but what we will see
here maybe I will read them all in total
who knows um what we will see here is
that when we arrive to the day of
Pentecost we see that we are a couple of
weeks after Jesus has ascended uh what
had happened in chapter 1 was that the
disciples were about 120 people in the
upper room and they were gathering
together there and all of uh all of that
familiar story where the little tiny
fire tornadoes little tiny pillar of
fires uh settled on each of their heads
uh divided up amongst them all and then
they started speaking in tongues
different languages that other people
whose heart language was not Aramaic or
Greek or Hebrew or whatever it is they
were speaking that day in uh Jerusalem
uh were able to hear it in their heart
language and it's an astounding thing
for them to witness it is an astounding
miracle and that shows us one of those
characteristics of that first generation
of the church and that is the norm of
miraculous uh something that absolutely
waines as time goes on but here uh we
certainly find a fever pitch of it going
on uh in ways that we just don't see in
other eras of church history so I want
you to see it acts chapter 2 let's start
at the
beginning when the day of Pentecost
arrived speaking of the disciples they
were all gathered in one place suddenly
there came from Heaven a sound like a
mighty rushing wind and it filled the
entire house where they were sitting by
the way this is the English Standard
Version if you are wondering what uh
what I use uh suddenly there came from
Heaven a sound like a mighty rushing
wind and it filled the entire house
where they were sitting now quick note
on that um if you don't see the
overtones between this and the mighty
East Wind that caused the um caused the
the dry ground to appear under the Red
Sea at The Exodus I would encourage you
to go look at that and see some of this
uh some of the familiarities here
including Pillar of Fire uh on uh in
verse three here divided tongues of fire
appeared to them and rested on each of
them and they were all filled with the
Holy Spirit and began to speak in other
tongues as the spirit gave them
utterance now there were dwelling in
Jerusalem Jews devout men from every
nation under heaven and at the sound uh
the multitude came together and they
were bewildered because each one was
hearing them speak in his own language
and so here we see the first mirac
Miracle of the New Testament Church and
that is when the disciples spoke people
who while they were in Jerusalem and
evidently understood Aramaic or Hebrew
they actually heard them in their own
language that is absolutely a source of
bewilderment and something that would be
very odd um it is it is debated among
some people whether the sound of the
language itself was different uh or if
it simply was interpreted by the ear
differently and I would be those I would
be among those who hold that it was it
was perceived in the ear differently um
meaning Peter said one set of words and
everyone heard that set of words in
their own language which means it wasn't
what was necessarily coming out of
Peter's mouth but it was what was being
perceived by the ears of the hearers
which is really just on a
level I certainly have never seen let's
put it that way it says they were amazed
and astonished saying are not all of
these who are speaking galileans and how
is it that we hear each of us in his own
language parthians mes elamites
residents of Mesopotamia Judea capadia
Pontius and Asia friia and pamilia Egypt
and the parts of Libya belonging to
sirene and visitors from Rome both Jews
and prelit and Arabians we hear
them telling in our own tongues the
mighty works of God and this is the part
that I think always gets overlooked what
is it it that the disciples were talking
about they weren't talking about
themselves how good their lives are now
that they're disciples they weren't
selling anybody on anything they were
telling them about what God has
done and here we get the very first
picture of what evangelism looks like in
the New Testament Church it is about God
and His accomplished and finished work
and you're going to see that play out
even more and more as we go on
tonight and says all were amazed and
perplexed saying to one another what
does this mean but others mocking them
said they are filled with new wine but
Peter standing with the 11 lifted up his
voice and addressed them saying men of
Judea and all who dwell in Jerusalem let
this be known to you and give ear to my
words for these people are not drunk as
you suppose since it is only the third
hour of the day but this is what was
uttered through the prophet Joel now
we're going to settle on another
characteristic of the New Testament
Church and that is that it is part of a
long
story Pentecost is something that is
looked forward to in the Old
Testament in types and shadows
absolutely was it spelled out exactly
what year and exactly what Manner and
exactly what it looked like no but was
it laid out that there was coming a day
and that the apostles and Jesus himself
connected that day directly with the
Prophecies of Joel some 7 800 years
beforehand the answer is that is yes
absolutely look at the way he quotes
Joel chapter 2 he says in that in the
days or excuse me in the last days it
shall be God declares that I will pour
out my spirit on All Flesh on your sons
and daughters they shall prophesy your
young men shall see Visions your old men
shall dream dreams even on my male
servants and female servants in those
days I will pour out my spirit and they
shall prophesy I will show wonders in
the heavens above and signs on the earth
below blood and fire and Vapor of smoke
the sun shall be turned to dark darkness
and the moon to blood before the day of
the Lord comes the great and magnificent
day and it shall come to pass that
everyone who calls upon the name of the
Lord shall be
saved the New Testament Church is hours
old maybe an hour old and already we are
talking about the most important aspects
of the message that is given to the
church and that is the work of God the
mighty works of God and the salvation of
his
people the connection to this Old
Testament prophecy and several other
instances that come to us throughout the
text here is that in the the apostles
are not looking at what they are doing
as something new in total but something
in kind and a continuation of what has
come before the separation that some
have placed between the Old Testament
and the New Testament is uh is begging a
question that is unbiblical the Old and
New Testament have a separation merely
in Focus they do not have a SE
separation in Authority they do not have
a separation as far as for accuracy or
even applicability to the modern Church
the Old Testament should be respected
alongside the New Testament and we're
going to see exactly how that's seen uh
throughout the New Testament Church when
we deal with the writings of the New
Testament coming in as part of the
Apostles Legacy um when we when we delve
into all of this we do not find that the
apostles see themselves as starting
something new but after the culmination
of the Old Testament promises in the
person of Jesus of Nazareth they see
themselves as continuing on the message
that what the prophets look forward to
has now finally
come and now you shall call upon the
name of the Lord to be saved verse 22
men of Israel hear these words Jesus of
Nazareth a man attested to you by God
with Mighty works and wonders and signs
that God did through him in your midst
as you yourselves know in other words
several of the people that were there
listening were actually eyewitnesses to
the events that had occurred whether
that being at the crucifixion or during
the ministry of Jesus Christ they were
able to see the mighty works and wonders
and signs that God did through him Peter
continues he says this Jesus delivered
up according to the definite plan and
forn knowledge of God you crucified and
killed by the hands of Lawless men God
raised him up loosing the pangs of death
because it was not possible for him to
be held by it uh and then he connects it
it directly now with the Psalms for
David says concerning him I saw the lord
always before me for he is at my right
hand that I may not be shaken therefore
my heart was glad and my tongue rejoiced
my flesh also will dwell in Hope for you
will not abandon my soul to Hades or let
your Holy One see corruption you have
made known to me the paths of life you
will make me full of gladness with your
presence in all of this Peter is
connecting not only the gospel message
with the Old Testament scriptures but
saying that this is actually a necessity
of fulfillment of what has been going on
there is the reality of what Christ
having experienced death death thought
it had its upper hand and yet Jesus
carries death away as a captive it is
actually quite a remarkable turn of the
expectations here and something that
Peter himself and all the disciples all
the apostles had only learned as of
recently how exactly God was going to
save his people from their sins
they had identified Christ as the Son of
God in fact Peter was the first one
revealed by the Holy Spirit to have done
that to recognize who he is but exactly
how he was going to do that was a
mystery to everybody there were multiple
theories about who the Messiah was going
to
come the reality of the Old Testament
prophets is that their Clarity was not
meant to make the future clear their
Clarity was to make your responsibility
to repent and depend upon the way God is
going to save his his people even if you
are ignorant of exactly how it
happens Peter continues and says
Brothers he refers to all of them uh
Jews and and god-fearers from all over
Brothers I may say to you with
confidence about the patriarch David
that he both died and was buried and his
tomb is with us to this
day being there for a prophet and
knowing that God had sworn with an oath
to him that he would not set one of his
Descendants on his throne excuse me that
he would set one of his Descendants on
his throne he foresaw and spoke about
the resurrection of the Christ and he
was not abandoned to Hades nor did his
flesh see corruption this Jesus God
raised up and of that we all are
witnesses if you ever want a good verse
to highlight in this section verse 32 is
a good one Jesus was raised up by God
and all of the disciples are
witnesses witnesses that give testimony
to the resurrection of Jesus Christ this
being the most significant event in
history since creation that there is a
new creation beginning that it be it
starts in death and it continues with
life and all of the death that was
brought in or as um as it was once said
the the fall of Man bringing in all of
our woe the expression of that
culminating factor of death is now
carried away in Victory and something
else may come from it he says being
therefore this is verse 33 being
therefore exalted at the right hand of
God and having received from the Father
the promise of the Holy Spirit he has
poured out this that you yourselves are
seeing and hearing right witness begets
witness right disciple begets Disciple
This is how the propagation of this is
going um we'll get into the details of
this here soon let me just finish this
description of the first day for David
did not Ascend into heaven but he
himself says the Lord said to my Lord
sit at my right hand until I make your
enemies your foot stol let all the house
of Israel therefore know for certain
that God has made him both Lord and
Christ this Jesus whom you
crucified now when they heard this they
were cut to the heart and said to Peter
and the rest of the Apostles Brothers
what shall we do and Peter said to them
ah this is marvelous repent and be
baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ for the Forgiveness of your
sins and you will receive the gift of
the holy spirit for the promise is for
you and for your children and for all
who are far off everyone whom the Lord
Our God calls to himself and with many
other words he bore witness and
continued to exhort them saying save
yourselves from this crooked generation
so those who received his word were
baptized and they were and there were
added to uh that day about 3,000
Souls this is a remarkable uh aspect
because as we uh as we work through the
early church we're going to see a myriad
of different practices that we're going
to work through every single one of them
um with regards to uh the moment of
conversion the uh the delaying of
baptism for several years while you uh
catechized people due to the rise of
persecutions a lot of the Practical
means of this uh wanting to prevent
people from uh causing uh significant
sins after their baptisms there's some
people that start to hold that um
baptism itself is the uh the mode not
the mode excuse me the actual operative
thing that separates people from their
sins rather than repentance and faith in
Christ here um this this whole picture
of this there's many different ways to
describe conversion and what is listed
in the text as being saved or saving
yourselves from this crooked generation
but the first expression of that is what
Peter says here in verse 38 repent and
be baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ for the Forgiveness of
your sins and you will receive the gift
of the Holy Spirit the same thing that
had just been given to them the Holy
Spirit himself is now promised to anyone
and everyone regardless of where they
live regardless of what their home is
regardless of what their language is
regardless of what their ethnicity is
repent and be
baptized now there's a number of
discussions about baptism we're going to
spend an entire evening on baptism in
the early Church um we did that during
the Deep Dives but I've got a lot more
stuff coming for that um so I don't want
to get bogged down on that or steal some
of the thunder on that one that one's
coming um soon but here just suffice it
to say that the expression of baptism
here is a continuation again the
continuation of what John had promised
and what Jesus had then promised right
the expression of what we now look at as
um as baptism merely by water um whether
you see it as a sign whether you see it
as a seal whether you see it as a
memorial whether you see it as something
that remits original sin I want to avoid
that argument for right now and just
simply appreciate what Peter is doing
here he is pointing out to them that it
is so significant that washing is
involved turning away from sin is
involved the name of Jesus Christ is
invoked forgiveness of sins and then the
gift of the life-giving one the Holy
Spirit
regardless of how you look at modes of
baptism or purposes let's set that aside
for just a second and just talk about
this on the base level of Salvation
itself you are dead and you must come to
life whatever rights whatever pictures
and part of that you want to focus on
fine but don't miss the forest for the
trees how significant it is that he is
speaking to Jewish people and
god-fearers and saying that they have a
need to turn to
Christ they are already these people in
Jerusalem because they worship the god
of Israel they're already in Jerusalem
because they were there for Passover
presumably they're there to stay through
Pentecost or were confused about the odd
goings on this year at Passover and the
crucifixion of Jesus and the darkening
of the skies and uh you know all of uh
the earthquake the people coming out of
the graves as Matthew expresss and
presenting themselves to the rulers as
risen from the dead there's so many
things that have happened in Jerusalem
in the past several weeks and whether
they had planned to stay over or they
just extended their stay to try to
figure it all out before going home and
telling people an unclear story well
this is the remarkable thing is that
Peter actually gives them the end of the
story the end of the story is that the
one who was crucified here a few weeks
ago is the one on whom the Forgiveness
of your sins depends
you must come to him for salvation and
he will give it to you not in a manner
that is just consistent with life in the
temporal but he will actually having
carried away death Grant you eternal
life you will receive the Holy Spirit as
gift now I believe that Peter's words
went far beyond Peter's intention
This Promise is for you and for your
children here he is expressing himself
to
Jews and for all who are far
off now we know from later in the book
of Acts and we're going to spend an
entire evening on this as well the
difficulty that the apostolic church had
with swallowing the reality that the
Gentiles are saved in the exact same
manner as Jews they had a real hard time
wrapping their heads around that because
the mystery of the salvation of the
Gentiles was kept hidden for long ages
but now as God the holy spirit continues
to lead the apostles into the Salvation
that he is enacting into the world they
find out that something bigger than what
they anticipate is going on and I
believe his words here contain a
prophetic that he does not quite
realize yes the promis is for the people
of Israel and for the descendants of
course if they repent and come to Jesus
Christ absolutely they will find
Salvation as well but it is also for all
who are far
off Ephesians 2 uses the same
terminology to describe Gentiles who
once were far off have been brought near
to the blood of Christ they once were
aliens to the promise of God now they
are joint HS with Christ it is simply a
remarkable thing that has taken place on
Pentecost and so the Capstone of his
sermon that morning was save yourselves
from this crooked generation
so what's the outcome verse 41 and then
this is where we'll get into the
descriptions here and the verses to
follow because then it just lays down a
list of descriptions and I want to dive
into
that verse 41 so those who received his
word were
baptized and they were added that day
about 3,000
Souls this is a phrasing that we're
going to find often those who were
baptized were those who received the
word we'll see it in multiple instances
this is the way of it in the beginning
and even those who hold to infant
baptism for instance which again we will
address this in coming
episodes when we look at the scriptural
witness this is the when it's expressed
explicitly this is the way of it when
somebody receives the word they are then
baptized there's no time period of
waiting for cumans or anything like like
this as you will find in the in the
second century and so forth there is no
infant baptism there is no uh nothing
but children baptism that do believe or
adult baptism that do believe those who
receive the word repent and are baptized
even in the very command repent and be
baptized the whole point is that
conversion is there I was listening to a
podcast this week um uh one that I I
have great respect for um and there was
mentioned on there and I don't I didn't
run it past them so I don't want to
mention who it was um I don't I don't
think that's fair but had mentioned that
well you know and this was an an
Anglican um uh presentation that well of
course the first generation of the
church would have just you know
believing converts but then after that
would be uh infant baptism and so forth
um but that's not what the early church
tells us nor is that what scripture
expresses uh when we dive into that uh I
will be able to demonstrate for you that
it was a new practice that came up about
100 50 years uh after the day of
Pentecost um I believe I can put that up
not even as a an argument from Silence
but as an argument of all of the
positive statements and descriptions we
have of baptism so I don't want to get
bogged down in that here but only to say
what we see on the first day is that
those who are baptized are those who
repent those who are baptized are those
who receive the word from the apostles
and that day there was 3,000 of them
that is an incredible thing that is an
absolutely over overwhelming response to
this now here's the thing that shouldn't
overly surprise us
either right here you have people who
already worship the god of Israel this
is not going to a new religion these
were those who are still Old Testament
Saints on the day of Pentecost
immediately become New Testament Saints
and so it shouldn't it shouldn't
surprise us that all of them who having
been Old Testament Saints receive his
word and are
baptized shouldn't surprise surpris us
at all it shouldn't surprise us that
thousands of people who heard this who
were there wanting to learn what things
had
transpired 3,000 is actually a small
number uh and you will see that the Lord
continues adding to the number day by
day look at verse 42 this is why I
really want to settle down because this
passage reveals to us so many different
things so many different habits and the
characteristics of the earliest church
that very first day that very first year
when the New Testament Church has born
here's what it looked
like verse
42 first thing they devoted themselves
to the apostles teaching now stop we're
going to take this phrase by phrase
because it's simply too important not
to in devoting themselves to the
apostles teaching what is it we
learn we learn that there is something
more to be expected than the Old
Testament scriptures one and there is
something more to be discussed what the
apostles teach the church focuses on why
because Jesus sent the apostles and led
them into all truth to show the church
what it is the gospel what it is the
Salvation that they're preaching and
what it is the life of the church ought
to look like and be
like and so the first characteristic we
have of the gathered assembly is that
they devoted themselves to the apostles
teaching by the way if you are are in a
church
that focuses on the New Testament often
enough you do the same thing still the
apostles teaching eventually was
codified into the New Testament we'll
talk about that transition when we get
there but here the early church devoted
themselves to the apostles teaching not
hard the apostles are almost all there
um they also devoted themselves to
Fellowship Fellowship is coming together
this is not an individualist life even
though salvation comes directly to each
Soul the life of the church is lived in
fellowship with one another and in
concert with one another in other words
the Christian Life that is being
promised here the Christian Life that is
being described here is one of communal
life you challenge one another you teach
one another you grow with one another
you establish each other's growth and
each other's Health on the help of one
another what else do they do they break
bread together
it was only what eight weeks ago that
Jesus instituted the Lord's
Supper as often as you eat of this and
drink of this do it in remembrance of me
this is the exact command of Jesus there
it's my body it's my blood don't forget
I had a body don't for or I have a body
don't forget I had blood that was
literally spilled that it atoned for the
sins of many do not forget how
significant and important all of these
things are
and then they also devoted themselves to
prayer this this is what the New
Testament Church looks
like it devotes themselves to the
apostles teaching to Fellowship breaking
bread and
prayer the relationship with one another
the relationship with Christ the
relationship with the Lord and the
relationship with the apostles
teachings all of these things are quite
definitional verse 43 a came upon every
soul and look how miraculous the first
generation of the church is Many Wonders
and signs were being done through the
apostles Many Wonders and signs were
being done through the
apostles now you don't have to read very
far into the book of Acts to see how
significant some of these signs are uh
there's in some places a shadow of Peter
that falls on somebody and they're
healed it stuff is is tremendous mendous
in fact if you ever want to see where it
reaches a fever pitch uh it is in the
city of Ephesus which again we have an
entire episode planned just for the city
of Ephesus because of how unique it is
but you'll have a handkerchief for
instance that had while brushed against
Paul was carried away and was able to
heal people right uh this is not a
teaching of relics such as it is but it
is a teaching directly of how the church
experienced the the message of the
gospel and the miraculous Norm there was
so many miracles going on in the first
generation of the church that we only
have bits and pieces of uh of a few but
here again we have a we have an
overarching statement by Luke awe Came
Upon every soul and Many Wonders and
signs were being done through the
apostles I mean gez if you read through
it you will find that philli upon uh
evangelizing the Ethiopian unic is
translated instantly from the Waters of
baptism uh up to a whole another
distance or a whole another
destination now he's just blinks out of
there stuff like this is odd stuff like
this is strange stuff like this is not
going on today it is it is simply
bizarre for us to go back and it's one
of the things that when someone says and
and I appreciate the desire right for
Purity and for originality uh you know
let's get back to the first century
church first of all you can't just
manufacture the signs and the Wonders
and second of all you don't have the
apostles
we don't have the apostles anymore we
have their teaching and so we devote
themel we devote ourselves to the
teaching but here you can't manufacture
stuff like this the first century church
was the first century church we aren't
that we are the 21st century church and
God has placed us here on purpose and we
will work our way up to that to see
exactly how that works
out let's continue on verse 44 all who
believed were together and had all
things in common they were selling their
possessions and belongings and
Distributing the proceeds to all as any
had need the overwhelming
generosity that this first church has
has confused a lot of people as to think
that this is somehow enforced by the
apostles to take the money no we find
out from the rest of the story that is
not even close to the case if somebody
had a field they had every right to keep
it if they wanted to sell it and keep
all the money it was theirs to do so you
see this in the rebuke of ananas and
Safara right Peter himself saying this
the the land was yours the money was
yours you didn't have to lie about
it but here you see generosity bubbling
up from the overwhelming camaraderie the
early church had the earliest church had
in
Jerusalem they were selling their
possessions and belongings and
distributing the proceeds to all
ensuring that none had
need and what was their
habit day by day they attended the
temple
together and they broke Breads in their
they broke bread in their
homes they received their food with glad
and generous
Hearts some
have theorized multiple things about
this verse uh I'm simply going to lay
out for you it's not as complicated as
it may
seem they attended the temple together
why because again the church is a
continuation of the Old Testament
promises this is the temple of God
gathering in the old temple of God
that's a remarkable thing it should not
be missed on us how uh interesting and
inceptive that
is but the breaking of bread and their
homes shows that there was actually a
time and a place for different aspects
of
worship and originally the breaking of
bread took place in their homes
you say well why is that well there was
not a central location they were not
allowed in the synagogues uh come very
soon um and the breaking of bread taking
place in their homes is natural because
that's where their Gathering would be
they attended the temple together but
then they also broke bread in their
homes they received their food with glad
and generous hearts in other words the
fruit of the spirit of gladness things
like generosity open to one another uh
the joy and the love of God that is
exuding from them and it plays out in
their small Gatherings and in their
large
Gatherings they all attempted the temple
together and then they went to their
homes and broke
bread right celebrating the what we
would call communion or Eucharist uh
breaking bread the prayers they devoted
themselves to all of these things
why because this is real
life in the midst of a crooked
generation they have found life
himself and it responds in their hearts
of glad and generousness looking out to
each other for after their needs verse
47 praising God and having favor with
all
people again the aspect of responding to
the Lord with praise something that is
not new something that comes as Peter
has already likened the entire movement
to the book of
Psalms we should not be surprised to see
that the praising of God is part of
their Gathering Together part of their
assembly having favor with all people
the Lord added to their number day by
day those who were being saved in other
words the number of the
church is added to by God the number of
the church is specifically made up of
those who are
saved we have a lot of definitions that
flow through all of this but the the
teaching is quite clear God is the one
saving people God is the one adding to
their numbers and their habits reflect a
history and a Conformity to both the Old
Testament text the prophets and the
expectation the coming one being Jesus
Christ on whom their salvation rests and
the teaching of the
Apostles all of this is so
significant and the result is that they
actually had favor with all the the
people because they weren't coming out
and
just making
issue they kept a lot of things to
themselves they broke bread privately
but they did still meet in the temple
they did still preach on the street side
as we see with Peter doing so will that
annoy some people will that frustrate
some people oh yes
but Nar can you hold something against a
group that's doing something like
this they're devoting themselves to
teaching
fellowship prayers praising
God they're not going out and breaking
laws they're not going out and causing a
stir they're not going out and refusing
to pay their taxes they follow Jesus's
commands on these
things and so much as it depends on them
they were to live at peace with all
people as Jesus had himself also
commanded pay your
taxes that's Caesar's inscription it's
not it's not the Lord's His Image is on
his
people render to Caesar what's his to
the Lord what is
his turn to Acts chapter 4 I want you to
see another list of
description this is an important one to
include not only because it also talks
about the generosity and the everything
in common um and and so forth but
because it gives a real important uh
verse one of the one of the most
significant uh I will Express here when
we see Acts chapter 4: 32 to35 I want to
read this now the full number of those
who believed were of one heart and
soul and no one said that any of the
things that belonged to him was his own
but they had everything in common in
other words they held every possession
everything with open hands if there was
a need in the church they were lining up
to meet that need that's that's a
remarkably close-knit Church
incredible this is a description of the
church in Jerusalem not the entire
church uh in in the whole world this is
a description of those who believe that
were there uh were of one heart and soul
they had all things uh in common
basically they they they held these
things with generous hands and anytime
that there was a need that arose someone
met it verse 33 one of my favorites with
great power the apostles were giving
their testimony now stop it is it has
often been assumed that if somebody is
giving their testimony in a church for
instance um which is common in in in
some lines that their testimony talks
about
themselves right yeah it's it's even
like oh what's your testimony what's
your you know this and that well the the
test testimony U is should be more
similar to what happens in a court of
law when you give testimony you give
testimony to something that has happened
and the testimony is not about the
witness it's about the occurrence and
what's being investigated here the
apostles are giving their testimony now
if you stop right there without reading
the rest of the verse you're you're
going to assume something if you're at
least in the world that I've walked
around in and that is that giving their
testimony means talking about themselves
and how nice their life is or how
different their life is now that they
know Jesus but that is not what Jesus
was sending them to be witnesses to in
Jerusalem Judea Samaria in the uttermost
parts of the world no he sent them to be
Witnesses of what well exactly what they
testify to here read verse 33 with great
power the apostles were giving their
testimony to the resurrection of the
Lord Jesus and great grace was upon them
all it is the Conquering of death and
the gifting of Salvation to his people
that is the focus of their
testimony
Jesus's conquering of death raising from
the dead Ascension to heaven promis to
come again these are
the pieces of the apostolic witness are
there more oh sure the rest of Acts will
bear that out but this places the
resurrection of Jesus Christ and the
accomplishment and the Seal of
justification
the father giving his full Assurance of
that by raising Jesus from the
dead the preaching of this story the
preaching of this occurrence the
preaching of this not just Theology and
history and everything else that goes
together causes great grace to be upon
them
all it must have been something else to
hear the apostles talk about this they
were eyewitnesses to these
things they got to witness how it is
that Jesus has portrayed himself how it
is that Jesus has spoken about himself
the Father the spirit the gospel that is
going to go out into all the world and
the stories of his life and Ministry and
death and
Resurrection Again Luke reminds us in uh
verse 34 there was not a needy person
among them for as many as were owners of
lands or houses sold them and brought
the proceeds of what was sold and laid
it at the apostles feet now you actually
see that it wasn't even waiting for a
need to show
up but there's a more organized section
to it and you can already see the
development of something organized
instead of um you know this person has a
need that rises up and then so well
person B then comes up and says oh wait
I've got an extra piece of a field I can
sell to match that need now you're
starting to see it a little bit more
developed everyone sold all sorts of
stuff so that they could give the
proceeds of it liquidate it give it to
the apostles and then the apostles
distributed it to each as any he had
need you already see a development in
how alms giving
changed we're not even out of chapter
four of the book of
Acts you're going to see as we move
forward all manner of things work this
way we're going to see that there are
aspects of the church's life that are
morphable to the situations things that
are done for practicality even an office
of the church deacons that is almost
made up on the spot in order to meet a
need and it becomes solidified in the
history of the church in the apostles
teachings the apostles teachings being
the rest of the New Testament I don't
want to uh overstep but that's exactly
what's going on and so what do we learn
about the early church what do we learn
about this church as it's born into this
we see it having multiple
characteristics it is first of all
Jewish
that's something that was at least
missed by Me growing up that the church
was
Jewish Gentiles weren't a part of this
yet right it took the whole story of
Cornelius and Peter on the roof of
Simon's house and all sorts of other
things to occur and then you it has to
go all the way to the entire church
meets together in Jerusalem with the
apostles with the people with the elders
and discusses how do we swallow follow
how do we digest the reality that the
spirit of God is falling on the Gentiles
in the same way as us that doesn't
happen till chapter 15 here the church
is
Jewish why because it is born out of
Judaism now is it a onetoone exactness
with Judaism oh no it is a Judaism that
looks and says our Messiah has come God
himself in the flesh God With Us Emanuel
himself has come he was crucified by law
men according to the plan and forn
knowledge of God this is found in Acts
4 and he was risen to the from the dead
with great power and now all men
everywhere specifically focus on Jews we
will see the development of it applied
to the Gentiles logically and as the
spirit of God continues on his Trek to
bring life into all the
world in all of these
instances we are seeing that the
repentance and the baptism and all of
these things are being focused in on the
person and the work of Jesus Christ and
the repentance the baptism the washing
the bearing fruit in keeping with
repentance of those who become disciples
they're not even called Christians yet
we see all manner of things change in
these early days of the church and
here's the thing that has not
stopped I I find it
um I find it interesting that uh and and
I mean that honestly I find it
interesting when when house churches
kind of crop up and they try to recreate
the first century and or the first
century habits and the first century
churches what they start to realize is
that after a time they start to outgrow
their houses and they start looking for
a building I've seen this happen
multiple times uh others you know for
you know to to keep the to keep the
perspective up try to keep that quelled
down but seeing the natural progression
of where we got buildings from
eventually enough people become
Christians and glory to God for that
that we can't meet in the house anymore
or we put an extension onto the house
which we actually see in the archaeology
of this time period an extension on the
house that allows more people to
gather here we see development of habit
and and adaptability to circumstances
that will Define the church going
forward and this is the wonderful thing
about the gospel you do not have to make
it only apply to a singular culture or a
singular
language right the Bible does not have
to stay in Greek it doesn't have to stay
in Latin right the teachings of the
Apostles can go to the heart language of
anyone especially now that we can
translate
it the expression of all of this does
not settle on us to say hey let's remake
this I don't want to remake the first
church right I'm not Jewish I wouldn't
even be in the focus here right even
even the inclusion of Gentiles was
something that had to be revealed in
time and then finally digested and
thought about by the apostles I don't
want to return to that I'm a gentile
right but in all of this we see that as
the Miracles go out through the apostles
as the testimony of Jesus's
accomplishments go out they are thought
of well by those who are outside they
have joy they are generous with one
another they are scriptural they see
themselves as being born out of the Old
Testament promises that Jesus has
fulfilled has brought to the culmination
and its climax all of the Prophecies of
the Old Testament and now things like
Joel 2 apply directly to the church now
the expressions of what David was saying
are find their full resolution
in Jesus's Ministry life and death and
Resurrection they see themselves as a
people born out of the intention plan
Revelation and person of Jesus
Christ scripture is as much a part of
that as
anything the words and commands of Jesus
are as much a part of that as anything
baptism is a part of that repentance is
a part of that faith is a part of that
the grace of God is a part of that and
the results of all of these things joy
and generosity and evangelism and
multiplicity and it all comes out of
it I love how simplistic a lot of this
is but I love that it doesn't shy away
from complexifying
it and yes I just made up that
word they're meeting the temple why they
were born after
Judaism I don't pretend that if you were
living at the time you would have an
easier time understanding the role of
the temple while the church which is the
Temple of the holy spirit is now
unseating it you know before the
destruction of the temple in 70 AD that
must have been a very hard thing to
think
about hard thing to work
around but as they devoted themselves to
the apostles teachings to prayers and
God adding to their numbers daily and
then God showing them the nature of the
church its adaptability the where it
goes how it
functions we see the church
born and it's an incredible thing to
witness and the result of the fruits of
the spirit that we start to see working
its way out into the church is something
that is laudable and for those who want
to recreate the first century church I
understand why you want to do that but
let me lay with you and leave you
with the commands of Christ at the very
close of the Book of
Matthew he expresses to them that the
gospel of the kingdom is going to go out
into all the nations of the world due to
the overarching authority that he has as
Savior of the world and he tells them to
go into all the world baptizing
them in the name of the father Son and
the Holy Spirit Spirit teaching them to
observe all that I command you and I am
with you always even to the end of the
age that's going to look different in
every
nation in every Century among every
people group every
language and it's
okay this is one of the wonderful things
about the gospel it is not relegated to
a special people or special time or
special ethnicity or special language
Jesus specifically designed the gospel
to go out so that the command to all men
to repent and believe in the gospel will
be able to be translated and carried
throughout all time and space nation and
people and so let me encourage you if
your church doesn't exactly match with
another church is doing it's okay we all
see in part we all see pieces and the
gospel as it has gone out has its
expression in many different
ways if you say well I don't want to add
anything to what uh God is doing I just
want it to be pure and exactly the way
it is let me ask you a question just for
food of thought and I'll leave you with
this if the development of these things
is to be rejected out of hand simply
because it wasn't part of the original
prescription why do both Paul and Jesus
honor the novel creation of some
something like
synagogues did you ever notice the Old
Testament doesn't have synagogues in it
it was a practice that arose During the
intertestamental period not by the
command of God in any way and yet Jesus
was in the synagogue week by week and
Paul Not only was in the synagogue week
by week but then when he went and
evangelized a new city he went to the
synagogue first even in the New
Testament era
it is okay for developments to happen in
fact it is built into the design of the
revelation of God that does not mean
that we leave behind things it means we
should be looking for
consistency do the effects of what we do
have the same effects as the first
century Church do the fruits of the
spirit come out of this do people who
claim salvation bear fruit in keeping
with repentance is there consistency
does it lead to Joy does it lead to
generosity does it lead to people that
are infatuated with the teachings of the
Apostles or does it lead to people that
are just infatuated with our
church may God humble us
all Lord's blessings to you all
[Music]
[Applause]